Combobox hooks docs (#1276)
adobe/react-spectrum: packages/@react-aria/combobox/docs/useComboBox.mdx

* Virtual focus management for ComboBox menu option navigation
* VoiceOver announcement enhancements for option focusing, filtering, and selection

## Anatomy

A ComboBox consists of a label, an input which displays the current value, a listbox popup, and a button
used to toggle the listbox popup open state. Users can type within the input to filter the available options
within the listbox popup. The listbox popup may be opened by a variety of input field interactions specified
by the `menuTrigger` prop provided to `useComboBox`, or by clicking or touching the ComboBox trigger button. `useComboBox` handles exposing
the correct ARIA attributes for accessibility for each of the components comprising the ComboBox. It should be combined
with [useListBox](useListBox.html), which handles the implementation of the popup listbox,
and [useButton](useButton.html) which handles the button press handlers returned by `useComboBox`.

`useComboBox` returns props that you should spread onto the appropriate elements:

<TypeContext.Provider value={docs.links}>
  <InterfaceType properties={docs.links[docs.exports.useComboBox.return.id].properties} />
</TypeContext.Provider>

> State is managed by the <TypeLink links={statelyDocs.links} type={statelyDocs.exports.useComboBoxState} /> hook from `@react-stately/select`.

Reviewer: Why is this a TypeLink instead directly to the stately docs page?

Author: Follows the pattern set up by previous stately doc pages. The stately pages are typically pretty bare, so having this TypeLink is sufficient since it shows the stately hook's api.

  let ref = React.useRef();
  let isDisabled = state.disabledKeys.has(item.key);
  let isSelected = state.selectionManager.isSelected(item.key);
  // Track focus via focusedKey state instead of with focus event listeners
  // since focus never leaves the text input in a ComboBox
  let isFocused = state.selectionManager.focusedKey === item.key;

  // Get props for the option element.
  // Prevent options from receiving browser focus via shouldUseVirtualFocus.
  let {optionProps} = useOption({
    key: item.key,
    isDisabled,
    isSelected,
    shouldSelectOnPressUp: true,
    shouldFocusOnHover: true,
    shouldUseVirtualFocus
  }, state, ref);

  let backgroundColor;
  let color;

  if (isSelected) {
    backgroundColor = 'blueviolet';
    color = 'white';
  } else if (isFocused) {
    backgroundColor = 'gray';
    color = 'black';
  } else if (isDisabled) {
    backgroundColor = 'transparent';
    color = 'gray';
  }

  return (
    <li
      {...optionProps}
      ref={ref}
      style={{
        background: backgroundColor,
        color: color,
        padding: '2px 5px',
        outline: 'none',
        cursor: 'pointer'
      }}>
      {item.rendered}
    </li>
  );
}

> <ComboBox label="Favorite Animal" defaultSelectedKey="red panda">

Reviewer: Should this example have an empty dropdown, seen as a line in the image, when nothing matches? 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/309540/104532307-c3b06380-55c4-11eb-8dcd-7e3d609d1082.png)

Author: Hm, I can't seem to get that to happen. What browser/repro steps?

Reviewer: Chrome (that is a version behind) and attaching video. 

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/309540/104660807-1a2ca900-567c-11eb-808a-9e39debe6afd.mov

Author: Ahhh, I see, problem with the controlled story, lemme see if I can change something

Author: kk, I pushed up a fix, good catch. I forgot to add items to the field state since that was controlled as well and useComboBoxState doesn't close the menu if the collection is empty and items/open state is controlled, that is up to the user event handlers

  let isSelected = state.selectionManager.isSelected(item.key);
  // Track focus via focusedKey state instead of with focus event listeners
  // since focus never leaves the text input in a ComboBox
  let isFocused = state.selectionManager.focusedKey === item.key;

  // Get props for the option element. Prevent options from recieving true focus via shouldUseVirtualFocus.
  let {optionProps} = useOption({
    key: item.key,
    isDisabled,
    isSelected,
    shouldSelectOnPressUp: true,
    shouldFocusOnHover: true,
    shouldUseVirtualFocus
  }, state, ref);

  let backgroundColor;
  let color;

  if (isSelected) {
    backgroundColor = 'blueviolet';
    color = 'white';
  } else if (isFocused) {
    backgroundColor = 'gray';
    color = 'black';
  } else if (isDisabled) {
    backgroundColor = 'transparent';
    color = 'gray';
  }

  return (
    <li
      {...optionProps}
      ref={ref}
      style={{
        background: backgroundColor,
        color: color,
        padding: '2px 5px',
        outline: 'none',
        cursor: 'pointer'
      }}>
      {item.rendered}
    </li>
  );
}
///- end collapse -///
// Using the same ComboBox component code from the first example...

> <ComboBox label="Favorite Animal" menuTrigger="focus">

Reviewer: Should we have all three cases of `menuTrigger` as examples?

Author: IMO I feel like the description before the example is sufficient, happy for others to weigh in

      {...optionProps}
      ref={ref}
      style={{
        background: backgroundColor,
        color: color,
        padding: '2px 5px',
        outline: 'none',
        cursor: 'pointer'
      }}>
      {item.rendered}
    </li>
  );
}

<ComboBox label="Favorite Animal" defaultSelectedKey="red panda">
  <Item key="red panda">Red Panda</Item>
  <Item key="cat">Cat</Item>
  <Item key="dog">Dog</Item>
  <Item key="aardvark">Aardvark</Item>
  <Item key="kangaroo">Kangaroo</Item>
  <Item key="snake">Snake</Item>
</ComboBox>
```

### Controlled

The following example shows how you would create a controlled ComboBox, controlling everything from the selected value (`selectedKey`)
to the combobox options (`items`). By passing in `inputValue`, `selectedKey`, `isOpen`, and `items` to the `useComboBoxState` hook you can control
what exactly your ComboBox should display.

It is important to note that you don't have to control every single aspect of a ComboBox. If you decide to only control a single property of the
ComboBox, be sure to provide the change handler for that prop as well e.g. controlling `selectedKey` would require `onSelectionChange` to be passed to `useComboBox` as well.

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we expand on the fact that the filtering in the example is different than the previous one precisely because it's controlled?

Author: Sure, I'll add a little blurb

OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language
governing permissions and limitations under the License. -->

import {Layout} from '@react-spectrum/docs';
export default Layout;

import docs from 'docs:@react-aria/combobox';
import collectionsDocs from 'docs:@react-types/shared/src/collections.d.ts';
import {FunctionAPI, HeaderInfo, InterfaceType, renderHTMLfromMarkdown, TypeContext, TypeLink} from '@react-spectrum/docs';
import i18nDocs from 'docs:@react-aria/i18n';
import listboxDocs from 'docs:@react-aria/listbox';
import overlaysDocs from 'docs:@react-aria/overlays';
import packageData from '@react-aria/combobox/package.json';
import selectionDocs from 'docs:@react-stately/selection';
import statelyDocs from 'docs:@react-stately/combobox';

```jsx import
import {useComboBox} from '@react-aria/combobox';
```

---
category: Pickers
keywords: [combobox, aria]
---

# useComboBox

<p>{renderHTMLfromMarkdown(docs.exports.useComboBox.description)}</p>

<HeaderInfo
  packageData={packageData}
  componentNames={['useComboBox']} />

## API

<FunctionAPI function={docs.exports.useComboBox} links={docs.links} />

## Features

> There is no native element to implement a ComboBox in HTML. `useComboBox` helps achieve accessible ComboBox components that can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A ComboBox can be built using the [&lt;datalist&gt;](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/datalist) HTML element, but this is very limited in functionality and difficult to style. `useComboBox` helps achieve accessible ComboBox components that can
```

navigation and other interactions. It does this using the <TypeLink links={collectionsDocs.links} type={collectionsDocs.exports.Collection} />
interface, which is a generic interface to access sequential unique keyed data. You can
implement this interface yourself, e.g. by using a prop to pass a list of item objects,
but <TypeLink links={statelyDocs.links} type={statelyDocs.exports.useComboBoxState} /> from
`@react-stately/combobox` implements a JSX based interface for building collections instead.
See [Collection Components](/react-stately/collections.html) for more information,
and [Collection Interface](/react-stately/Collection.html) for internal details.

In addition, <TypeLink links={statelyDocs.links} type={statelyDocs.exports.useComboBoxState} />
manages the state necessary for single selection and exposes
a <TypeLink links={selectionDocs.links} type={selectionDocs.exports.SelectionManager} />,
which makes use of the collection to provide an interface to update the selection state.
It also holds state to track if the popup is open, if the ComboBox is focused, and the current input value.
For more information about selection, see [Selection](/react-stately/selection.html).

> ## Usage

Author: Sounds good, I've moved the first example and accompanying text to a "Example" section and added a Uncontrolled section to "Usage"

          // Use virtual focus to get aria-activedescendant tracking and
          // ensure focus doesn't leave the input field
          shouldUseVirtualFocus
          listBoxRef={listBoxRef}
          popoverRef={popoverRef}
          state={state} />
      }
    </div>
  );
}

function ListBoxPopup(props) {
  let {
    popoverRef,
    listBoxRef,
    state,
    shouldUseVirtualFocus,
    ...otherProps
  } = props;

  // Get props for the listbox.
  // Prevent focus moving to listbox via shouldUseVirtualFocus
  let {listBoxProps} = useListBox({
    autoFocus: state.focusStrategy,
    disallowEmptySelection: true,
    shouldUseVirtualFocus,
    ...otherProps
  }, state, listBoxRef);

  // Handle events that should cause the popup to close,
  // e.g. blur, clicking outside, or pressing the escape key.
  let {overlayProps} = useOverlay({
    onClose: () => state.close(),
    shouldCloseOnBlur: true,
    isOpen: state.isOpen,
    isDismissable: true
  }, popoverRef);

  // Add hidden <DismissButton> components at the start and end of the list
  // to allow screen reader users to dismiss the popup easily.
  return (
    <div {...overlayProps} ref={popoverRef}>

>       <DismissButton onDismiss={() => state.close()} />

Author: Sounds good, I'll remove the extra one

    key: item.key,
    isDisabled,
    isSelected,
    shouldSelectOnPressUp: true,
    shouldFocusOnHover: true,
    shouldUseVirtualFocus
  }, state, ref);

  let backgroundColor;
  let color;

  if (isSelected) {
    backgroundColor = 'blueviolet';
    color = 'white';
  } else if (isFocused) {
    backgroundColor = 'gray';
    color = 'black';
  } else if (isDisabled) {
    backgroundColor = 'transparent';
    color = 'gray';
  }

  return (
    <li
      {...optionProps}
      ref={ref}
      style={{
        background: backgroundColor,
        color: color,
        padding: '2px 5px',
        outline: 'none',
        cursor: 'pointer'
      }}>
      {item.rendered}
    </li>
  );
}
///- end collapse -///
// Using the same ComboBox component code from the first example...

<ComboBox label="Favorite Animal" disabledKeys={['cat', 'kangaroo']}>
  <Item key="red panda">Red Panda</Item>
  <Item key="cat">Cat</Item>
  <Item key="dog">Dog</Item>
  <Item key="aardvark">Aardvark</Item>
  <Item key="kangaroo">Kangaroo</Item>
  <Item key="snake">Snake</Item>
</ComboBox>
```

## Internationalization

`useComboBox` handles some aspects of internationalization automatically.

> For example, the item focus, count, and selection VoiceOver announcements are formatted to match the current locale.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the item focus, count, and selection VoiceOver announcements are localized.
```
